The Joe Rogan experience. How do you get it journalism back on track?
Is it possible at this point? I mean, is it is a lost art,
is it going to be like calligraphy? I mean, yeah.
Right. Yeah, yeah, exactly. Yeah. The Japanese calligraphy, right.
You have to pass it down through masters and maybe that's,
that's going to be able to have journalism. It's like, I mean,
and then there's two things that could happen. One is that like,
if you created something like neither side news right now, right. And just like,
uh, that's a great name. Yeah.
Like a network where it was a bunch of people who just kind of did the job
without the editorializing. I think it would have,
it would probably have a lot of followers right away. It would make money.
And nobody has clued into that yet. Like if,
if some canny entrepreneur were to do that and that we're to bring back the
business that, or, you know,
journalism has always been kind of quasi subsidized in this country, you know,
going back to the pony express, newspapers were carried free across to the west,
right? The us postal service said that the original 19,
the communications act of 1934, the idea was, you know, we,
you could lease the public airways,
but you had to do something in the public interests. So you,
you could make money doing sports and entertainment,
but you could take a loss on news.
And so it was kind of quasi subsidized in that way,
but that doesn't exist anymore. There's no subsidy really for news anymore.
I'm not in a story short. I agree with that, that being the way to go,
but there has to be something because right now the financial pressure to be bad
is just too is too great. You know, like there's no,
there's no way to sorry to go on this. But I came,
when I came from the business, when the money started getting tighter,
the first thing they got rid of where the long form investigative reporters,
like you couldn't just hire somebody to work on a story for three months anymore
because you needed them to do content all the time.
Then they got rid of the fact checkers, you know,
which had another serious problem, you know? And,
and so now the money is so tight that he just had these people doing clickbait
all the time and they're not doing real reporting.
And so they have to fix the money problem. I don't know how they would.
Do that though. How much has it changed recently? Because like when that piece,
that you,
the stuff that you wrote about the banking crisis was my favorite coverage of it
and the,
the most relatable and understandable and the way you spelled everything out.
Um, could you do that today?
Yeah, but I think it would be harder because that's not that long ago,
it's it really is. And it's only, you know, that was,
I really stopped doing that in like 2014 or so five years out.
But the, the big differences, uh,
social media has had a huge impact on attention span. So, you know,
I was writing like 7,000 word articles about credit,
default swaps and stuff like that.
I was trying really hard to make it interesting for people, you know,
you use jokes and humor and stuff like that,
but now people would not have the energy to really fight through that.
You'd have to make it shorter. Um, even TV, you know, they,
people, you don't see that kind reporting that in depth. Yeah.
Kind of process reporting where you teach,
where you're teaching people something, because people just tune out right away.
Like they need just a quick, hit a headline on a couple of facts.
So yeah, there's a big problem with audience, right? We've,
we've trained audiences to consume the news differently and all they really want
to get as a take. Now, you know, it's like the,
everything's like an ESPN hot take. Right. You know, so that's the counter.
To that though. Is this what we're doing right now? Like,
these are always these long conversations, they're hours and hours long,
and there's a bunch of them out there now.
It's not like mine is an isolated one and there's so many podcasts that cover
and some of them can cover them, like in a serial form. Like, um,
the dropout was that there was other call that yes,
it was the dropout was the one about that woman who created that fake blood
company. Yes. Right. Susan, what was her name?
Elizabeth. What is her name?
Elizabeth Hall. That's right. That's right. Theranose yeah. The,
the completely fraudulent company. That was an amazing podcast. Absolutely.
That if I read it, I probably you're right. I probably would have like a boring,
right. I probably would have abandoned it earlier,
but listening to it in podcast form,
listening to actual conversations from these people,
listening to people's interpretations of these conversations,
listening to people that were there at the time telling, you know,
telling stories about when they knew things were weird.
And when they started noticing the,
the there's like tests that were incorrect,
that they were covering up that kind of.
Like you can do that now with something like this.
And I think that one of the good things about podcasts too,
is you don't need anybody to tell you that you could,
you could publish this.
Yeah, no abs absolutely. I think you're you're right.
And I think the formats,
like this reveal that the news companies are wrong about,
uh, about some things about audiences. Like they,
they think that people can't handle an in-depth discussion about things.
They think that audiences only want to watch 30 seconds of something they don't
they're, they're interested. They, they, they do have curiosity about things.
It's just, uh, it's very difficult to con convince people in the news business,
especially to take chances on that kind of content. You know, they'll,
they'll do it for a podcast. They'll do it for a documentary. But, um,
but for, for the news, they just,
they're making things shorter and shorter and shorter. You know,
I was really lucky to have an editor who I, you know,
understood the idea that we have to get into this in depth.
There also it's going to be meaningless to people. Right. Um,
that's pretty rare, you know, for the most part, they,
you don't see them taking that kind of bet anymore,
but maybe podcasts will help people, punk puncture that.
But the flip side of that is that they're not,
they're not investing in stuff like, um,
like international news in the way they used to, like,
when I came up in the business, every bureau, uh,
every big network had bureaus in every major city around the world, you know,
Rome, Berlin, Moscow, whatever it is. Right.
And they had newsrooms full of people who are, you know,
out there gathering news. Now there's none of that. Right.
Because they figured out they can make the money just as easily by having
somebody sitting in an office in Washington or New York and just,
you know, link to something and have a take on something, you know? So the,
I think the news is getting worse. Podcasts are getting more interesting. Maybe,
maybe there's a happy medium. They can find in between, well.
As well, documentaries are commercially viable. If it's a great subject, like,
um, like a good examples that wild, wild country one, or, you know,
I didn't even know that that cult existed. I had no idea what,
what happened up there. And then, so this, this documentary sheds light on it.
It does it over, like, I think it was like six episodes or something like that.
It's amazing. And it made a ton of money.
Yeah. Or making a murderer was another one. If it was really good, like they,
you take, because that's something that happens all over the place.
You have these criminal justice cases and they're, you know,
terrible and justice has happened. Um, and you know, if you,
she really tell the whole story and make characters out of people and invest the
time and energy to, to tell it, tell it, well,
people still like really good storytelling. Um, but, uh,
but I think within the news business, they just, they have this belief they're,
hard-headed belief that people can't handle difficult material.
And I don't know why that is, you know? Yeah. I don't know why it is either.
It's. I mean,
I think there's a large number of people that aren't satisfied intellectually by
a lot of the stuff they're being spoonfed.
And they think that because the vast majority of things that are
commercially viable are short attention, span things.
I think it's like this real sloppy way of thinking.
Non-risk taking way of thinking. They're like, well,
this is how people consume things.
You got to give them like a music video style editing, or they just tune out.
But there's always been a thirst for actual long form conversations.
You don't an actual real in-depth exploration of something in a,
in a very digestible way.
Like one of the good things about doing your podcast or this podcast,
any podcast really is that you can listen to it while you're commuting.
You listened to it.
And it'll actually give you something that occupies your mind and interests you
during what would normally be dead time. Right?
Yeah. And, and you're absolutely right about the,
the thirst for something else. And again,
I think when people turn on most news products,
they're getting this predictable set of things and that doesn't quench that
thirst for them. They're not, they're not being challenged in any way.
They're not seeing different sides of a topic. You know, you're not approaching,
uh, covering a subject, honestly, by genuinely, uh,
you exploring the idea that so that people you may have thought were bad or
right. Or people that you may have thought are good or wrong,
it's just all predictable. So I think people are fleeing to other things now.
Right. They just, they, they want, they want to just get the story. They don't,
they don't want to have a whole lot of, you know, editorializing on top of it.
And yeah. And, uh, yeah. And, and they,
I think also there's a lot of underestimating of audiences going out there
and like, we, we just think that they can't handle stuff and they can, yeah.
They're, they're, they're they're interested, but we, we,
we just take it for granted that they can't do it. Maybe I'm guilty of that too,
you know? Cause I've been doing this for so long, but, but yeah, it,
it does happen.
I don't think people have changed that much. Yeah, no.
Probably, probably, probably not. It's just, um, it's just difficult, you know,
maybe it's also, we don't have the stamina to,
to stick with a story in the same way that we used to,
like now if a story doesn't get a million hits right away, we don't,
we don't return to the subject. Um, you know,
you think about stories like Watergate,
like when Woodward and Bernstein first did those stories,
they were complete duds. Like everybody thought they were on the wrong path.
They were the only people who were covering it.
And a lot of those stories kind of flailed around, you know what I mean? They,
they didn't get the big response and it wasn't until much later that it became
this hot thing that everybody was watching and you wouldn't see.
So that wouldn't happen now. Right? Like if, if reporters were on a story,
if it didn't catch fire within the first couple of passes,
your editor is probably going to take you off it. Now.
What was that story that the New York times worked on about Trump and they
worked on it for a long time and it was released and went in and out of the news
cycle. In a matter of days, nobody gave a.
The, yeah. The one about his finances. And it was like a 36,000 word story.
It was like, unbelievable. It was like,
it was like six times as big as any is the biggest story I've ever written in my
life.
They thought it was a giant take down.
Right. Yeah. And it was your,
it was like a 36 hour thing if that. Right. And, and maybe,
maybe, yeah. And people kind of said, oh, this is amazing.
It's got all this information in it. And it just fell flat, you know?
And that's,
and the important thing about that is that news companies see this
and they say, wow, we invested all this time and money. We put our, you know,
really good reporters on this. We gave them six months to work on something.
And it got the same amount of hits as you know,
some story about, uh, you know,
a carp with a human face that was filmed in China. You know what I mean?
Like some thing that we, you know,
we picked off the wires and we stuck it in page 11, whatever it was.
So then that what that tells them the incentives now are,
let's not bother let's,
let's not do six months invest in investigations of anything anymore,
because what's the point we're going to get as many hits doing something dumb,
you know? So they just don't take the risk anymore.
God, it's so crazy that that's the incentive now that all clicks total,
it's such a strange trap to fall into. And, and, and.
Then there's also the, the other thing, which is the, the litigation problem,
you know,
and this is another thing I wrote about in the book is that there was a series
of cases in the,
in the eighties and nineties where reporters kind of took on big companies.
I'm at the Chiquita banana thing that the Cincinnati Enquirer did. Uh,
remember the movie, the, um, the insider,
but Brian and Williamson tobacco company, CBS. Right. Um,
there was another one with Monsanto in Florida where some Fox reporters went
after Monsanto and they,
so they all got sued and it costs their companies a ton of money and
reputational risk. And so after that,
what news companies said is why take on a big company
that can fight back and throw a lawsuit at us?
And what do we win by that? We're not going to get more audience from that,
you know? So now if you watch consumer reporting, you know,
at like a small, um, TV station, usually it's,
they're going to bang on some little Chinese restaurant that has roaches or
something like that. They're not going to go after Monsanto or, or, or,
you know, Chiquita banana,
because there's no point there it's too much of a
risk. So they just don't do it. And that's another thing that's,
that's gone wrong with reporting. You know, they, they,
they've the economic benefit of going after a powerful adversary isn't
there anymore. So they don't do it. And, uh, that's, that's,
it's a problem that clearly you've.
Seen a giant change in journalism from when you first started to where we are
now, do you have any fears or concerns about the future of it? I mean,
this is what you do for a living. What is your, what are your thoughts on it?
Where do you think it's going? I mean, I'm really worried.
About it because, um,
because you need the journalists to kind of exist
apart from politics and to be a check on everything. Right.
I think that the whole idea of having a fourth estate is that it's separate from
the political parties, right? I mean, I don't work for the DNC.
It's not my job to write bad news about Donald Trump, right?
That's the DNC's job. You know, they, they,
they put up press releases about them. And if people would see us as,
as being indistinguishable from political parties or being all editorial,
then we don't have any power anymore. Like, that's, that's the first thing.
Like the press doesn't have any ability to influence people.
If people don't see us as independent and truthful and all those things.
And so that's what I really worry about right now is like,
people won't will stop listening to the media. They'll still tune us out.
They don't trust us anymore.
And like Walter Cronkite from 1972,
the Gallup poll agency found that he was the most trusted man in America.
And that was true all also in 1985, like for 13 consecutive years,
he was the most trusted, there's no reporter in America. Who's,
who's the trusted man in America that doesn't exist.
Yeah, exactly. So people think of us as clowns and, you know,
entertainment figures. And so how are you gonna,
how are you going to impact the world if people think you're a joke, you know?
And, and that's why that's what I really worry about.
We don't have any institutional self-respect anymore. And, you know, we don't,
we don't feel like we have to, um, you know, challenge, challenge, audiences,
challenge, challenge, powerful people, you know, it's,
it's just a bunch of talking points and that's,
that's not what the business is about. So I worry about it. Um,
and you know,
I think there are a lot of journalists who kind of say the same thing.
We all kind of talk some talk amongst ourselves, which is, you know, the, the,
the job, as we knew,
it is kind of being phased out and changed into something else. And, um,
and that's not a, that's not a good thing, you know, cause people do need in,
in tough times, people need, need the press. Uh, you know,
as ridiculous as that sounds now because, but it's true. And, uh,
I don't know where, where we go from here. Legitimate.
Journalism is so important. It's so important.
It's the only way you really find out what's going on, right. The only way,
right.
You're not going to find out through the depictions of the people that were
actually involved in it that want you to see it a certain way.
You're not going to find that from people that have financial incentives and
given you a specific narrative, you need real journalism. Yeah.
It's so hard to find. And I think it's one of the reasons why we're so lost.
And it's one of the more insidious aspects of the term fake news.
Cause God, that's so easy to throw around. It's like,
it's so easy to call someone a bigot. It's so easy to call someone a racist.
And it's so easy to say fake news and all that.
They all have the same sort of effect.
They just diminish anything that you have to say almost instantaneously.
And th th there's when,
when you can cast the entire news as being fake, um,
people can tune a tune and out, but a lot of that has to do with,
but who is doing the news reading now? Right?
Like in the sixties and seventies, maybe before reporters,
a lot of them came from the middle and lower classes. Like, you know, they were,
it was, the job was originally kind of like being a plumber, right.
W w was more of a trade than a profession. And so you had a lot of people who,
who went into the job and they had this kind of attitude of just wanting to
stick it to the man. You know, like they, they,
they didn't want to be close to power.
They wanted to take it on people like Seymour Hersh, right?
Like if you see that kind of personality who just wants to take the truth and
rub it in somebody's face. Um, but then after all the president's men,
it became this sexy thing to be a journalist. And you saw all,
a lot of people from my generation who went into journalism because they wanted
to be close to politicians and hang out with them.
That's kind of like the primary colors thing, right.
Where you see people who they just want to like, have a beer with the,
with the presidential candidate.
And that's totally different from what it used to be like, not, so now,
now we're on the wrong side of the rope line. You see what I'm saying?
Like we used to, we used to be outside of power, like taking it on,
and now we're kind of seeing w w we're more upper-class in,
in the press and we're,
we're kind of in bed with the same people we were supposed to be covering.
And that's, that's not a good thing. People want people to see that they, they,
they, you know, that's,
that's one of the reasons why they say they call us fake news is because they,
they see us as doing PR for, you know, rich.